README.md, before:

## Welcome! Tervetuloa! Добро пожаловать!

The website is under construction, but you can visit [my blog at Wordpress](https://merclangrat.wordpress.com) about retro computers.

You can contact me (Russian/English/Ukrainian):
- WhatsApp/Telegram: **+49-170-475-8557** 
- Email ***mercurius(@)elming.org***

**I do not speak German**. If you write to me in German, I can only read and answer using Google Translate/DeepL (or in English)  
But it's better not to do so, it makes me nervous and uncomfortable. Write in English, please.

**I do NOT like Mac OS X** (I don't call it anything else because, for me, MacOS is a Classic one). Mac OS X looks like putting a square peg into a round hole. Then, I am not the best person to ask about building software/troubleshooting anything on it.  
And of course, I am against current Apple politics.

In my everyday life, I use [Devuan Linux](https://devuan.org) - a systemd-free Linux distro.

- [My Github (not so much there)](https://github.com/merclangrat)
- My CV on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/merclangrat/)
- My page on [Vintage Computer Festival 2020 about BK-0010-01, the Soviet home computer](https://wiki.vcfb.de/2020/en:soviet_computers)
- [Some old software, Nekochan FTP archive](http://lizaurus.com)

This domain is NOT for sale!

Commit message:

add pkgsrc on Solaris page

README.md, after:

## Welcome! Tervetuloa! Добро пожаловать!

The website is under construction, but you can visit [my blog at Wordpress](https://merclangrat.wordpress.com) about retro computers.

You can contact me (Russian/English/Ukrainian):
- WhatsApp/Telegram: **+49-170-475-8557** 
- Email ***mercurius(@)elming.org***

**I do not speak German**. If you write to me in German, I can only read and answer using Google Translate/DeepL (or in English)  
But it's better not to do so, it makes me nervous and uncomfortable. Write in English, please.

**I do NOT like Mac OS X** (I don't call it anything else because, for me, MacOS is a Classic one). Mac OS X looks like putting a square peg into a round hole. Then, I am not the best person to ask about building software/troubleshooting anything on it.  
And of course, I am against current Apple politics.

In my everyday life, I use [Devuan Linux](https://devuan.org) - a systemd-free Linux distro.

Also, I spend some time on using pkgsrc on Solaris 10 SPARC. Solaris is my "favourite" UNIX, I have [a blog post with the story](https://merclangrat.wordpress.com/2024/12/15/solaris-twenty-years-after/)  
This is the page about my progress: [pkgsrc on Solaris 10 SPARC in 2024](/pkgsrc-solaris10). Feel free to contact me to exchange the experience!

If writing emails isn't the best way, feel free to comment in my blog.

- [My Github (not so much there)](https://github.com/merclangrat)
- My CV on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/merclangrat/)
- My page on [Vintage Computer Festival 2020 about BK-0010-01, the Soviet home computer](https://wiki.vcfb.de/2020/en:soviet_computers)
- [Some old software, Nekochan FTP archive](http://lizaurus.com)

This domain is NOT for sale!
